Fundamentals concept (#190)
exercism/awk: concepts/fundamentals/introduction.md

# Introduction

> We'll refer to the _language_ as **AWK** and to the _executable_ that interprets AWK programs as **`awk`** or **`gawk`**.

Reviewer: * Do you want to touch on how people actually use/write awk on the terminal? eg [this slide](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1l9S_6QB8ES5vrp573Ms578qhSEC0xE_xjazJKNyHoSI/preview?slide=id.p10) and/or [this slide](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1l9S_6QB8ES5vrp573Ms578qhSEC0xE_xjazJKNyHoSI/preview?slide=id.p18)
* Do you want to touch on user defined vars?

Author: I added the first slide. The others can wait for subsequent concepts.

## Patterns and Actions

> An AWK program is structured in **pattern-action pairs**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An AWK program is made up of a series of **pattern-action pairs**.
```

```awk
pattern1 { action1 }
pattern2 { action2 }
...
```

A **pattern** can be a regular expression pattern to match against the input.
But it can also be any expression that results in a true/false value.

An **action** is one or more AWK commands.
The enclosing braces are required.

If the result of the pattern is _true_, then the corresponding action is evaluated.

> ### Omit the pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Default pattern
```

The pattern can be omitted, in which case the action is evaluated _for every input record_.
In other words, an "empty" pattern is implicitly _true_.

### Omit the action

> The action can be omitted, in which case the default action is to **print** the current record.

Reviewer: "record" was not yet defined.

### Special patterns

> Two special pattern that are often used are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are two special pattern that are used often.
```

- `BEGIN` will evaluate the associated action before any input is consumed.
- `END` will evaluate the associated action after all input is consumed.

## Records and Fields

> AWK splits the input into **records** and **fields**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWK parses the input as a series of **records**.
Each record is made up of zero or more **fields**.
```

> The default behaviour is to 
> 
> - split the input into records using **newline** as the "record separator", so each _line_ is a record.
> - split the record into fields using **whitespace** as the "field separator", so each _word_ is a field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, each line is a separate record.
That is, AWK uses a newline as the default record separator.
By default, each word on the line line is a separate field.
That is, AWK uses a whitespace as the default record separator.
```

You can supply your own input record separator with the `RS` variable.

> You can supply your own input field separator with the `FS` variable.

Reviewer: Do you want to mention `-F`?

Set these variables in the `BEGIN` block.

### Field variables

> You refer to fields as `$1`, `$2`, `$3`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fields are referenced using `$1`, `$2`, `$3`, etc.
```

> The current record is `$0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`$0` is used to refer to the entire current record.
```

### Other common variables

- **`NF`** stores the _number of fields_ in the current record.

> - **`$NF`** is the _value of the last field_.

Reviewer: `$NF` isn't a variable, per se. You may want to be more explicit about `$` proceeding *any* number, ie `$(NF - 1)` is also valid.

- **`NR`** stores the _current record number_.
  - when multiple input files are being processed, `NR` will hold the total number of records processed so far.

> - **`FNR`** stores the _record number_ of the _current input file_
>   - a common AWK idiom is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`FNR`** stores the _record number_ of the _current input file_.
  - A common AWK idiom is
```

    ```awk
    NR == FNR {action}
    ```
    This means "if the record number equals the record number of the current file", which is only true for records in the _first input file_.

## Truthiness

AWK was developed at Bell Labs, where C was invented. 

> AWK uses the same concept of truthiness as C, where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWK uses the same concept of truthiness as C:
```

- the number `0` is **false**
- _any other number_ is **true**

Since AWK is a text-processing language, truth values are extended to _strings_

- an empty string `""` is **false**

> - _any non-empty string_ is **true**

Reviewer: You may be overusing italics and bold ;)
Do you want to reserve bold for definitions?

~~~~exercism/caution
The number `0` is **false**.<br>
The non-empty string `"0"` is **true**!

We'll get more into AWK data types in subsequent concepts.
~~~~

## Comments

> The `#` character starts a comment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anything after a `#` on a line is ignored.
This is used for adding comments to the code.
```

> ## Some examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples
```

> Here are some awk programs that produce the same results as other common Unix commands.

Reviewer: It might be worth calling out explicitly how these use default patterns/actions.

The intro says awk uses pattern/action pairs ... then the examples don't actually illustrate that.
